BrainStem Project Status

Status date: 31 July 2026
 Project name: BrainStem
 Former name: KI-System V8
 Python package: ki_system

1. Live

2. Current Architectural State

The current project snapshot contains a phase-based autonomous runtime built around AutonomousLoop.

The minimal loop kernel is defined in:

ki_system\autonomous.py

The concrete learning chain is installed through:

ki_system\phase_registry.py

This separation is intentional:

autonomous.py remains a minimal execution kernel.
phase_registry.py defines the runtime phase order.
Individual phase modules implement learning, replay, regulation, sleep-wake behavior, stability observation, and guarded Stage-B preparation.
Later runtime wrappers extend the chain without introducing direct fact, relation, or question writes.

The current project snapshot contains 65 original source files. The cooperative neuromodulator and sleep-wake integration adds one new module, resulting in 66 Python modules in the updated package. All 66 Python files passed compilation in the delivered build.

3. Learning Model

BrainStem currently uses the learning mode:

context_hypotheses_with_neuromodulators

The system learns through context hypotheses and related observation structures rather than direct conversion of text into facts.

The active conceptual learning path includes:

Context observation
Integrated self-improving learning
Strategy refinement
Outcome closure
Observation and strategy memory
Context expansion
Effectiveness evaluation
Strategy selection
Experiment outcome learning
Outcome-driven diversification
Offline replay
Meta-plasticity
Homeostatic regulation
Sleep-wake regulation
Slow-wave consolidation
Stability and allostatic monitoring
Guarded hypothesis graduation preparation

The current learning chain remains hypothesis-centered. Facts, relations, and user-facing questions are not used as unrestricted learning targets.

4. Digital Neuromodulator System

BrainStem has twelve digital neuromodulators.

Six core neuromodulators
Dopamine
Serotonin
Glutamate
GABA
Noradrenaline
Acetylcholine
Six extended neuromodulators and regulators
Adenosine
Endocannabinoids
Cortisol
Histamine
Orexin
BDNF

All twelve are connected to the graphical interface.

The six core neuromodulators now have a common canonical runtime authority. Their final cycle values are written to:

phase6a_neuromodulated_sleep_state

This is also the source used by the GUI, so the backend writer and graphical reader now share the same canonical state.

5. Six-Core Neuromodulator Dynamics

The new canonical regulation module is:

ki_system\v8_cooperative_core_neuromodulator_sleep_authority_release.py

It computes target states for all six core neuromodulators using existing BrainStem signals.

Inputs used by the regulator

The regulator reads:

average learning outcome,
exploration bias,
consolidation bias,
inhibition bias,
revision bias,
persistent unresolved-gap pressure,
adenosine level,
histamine level,
orexin level,
BDNF level,
cortisol level,
Phase-7c glutamate state,
and Phase-7c GABA state.

The values are not changed randomly. Each target is derived from current internal system conditions.

Regulation method

The canonical value approaches its target gradually:

new value = old value + 0.18 × (target value - old value)

This produces bounded, interpretable dynamics rather than abrupt state changes or artificial oscillations.

All core values are constrained to a safe operating interval between 0.05 and 0.95.

Functional interpretation
Dopamine

Dopamine is influenced by:

observed outcomes,
exploration,
reduction of persistent unresolved pressure,
and low stress.

It represents motivation, reward-related learning value, and exploratory readiness.

Serotonin

Serotonin is influenced by:

consolidation readiness,
low stress,
successful outcomes,
and inhibitory stability.

It supports stabilization, persistence, and controlled consolidation.

Glutamate

Glutamate is influenced by:

exploration,
orexin-supported activity,
unresolved pressure,
and the current sleep tendency.

It represents excitatory learning drive while remaining subject to Phase-7c E/I regulation.

GABA

GABA is influenced by:

inhibition bias,
cooperative sleep readiness,
cortisol-related protective pressure,
and reduced exploration.

It acts as a system-wide inhibitory and stabilizing regulator.

GABA is not interpreted as a word-specific or relation-specific error suppressor.

Noradrenaline

Noradrenaline is influenced by:

unresolved pressure,
histamine,
orexin,
and cortisol.

It represents arousal, alerting, and pressure-sensitive activation.

Acetylcholine

Acetylcholine is influenced by:

revision requirements,
histamine,
orexin,
and exploration.

It supports attention, precision, revision, and active processing.

6. Glutamate-GABA E/I Regulation

The Phase-7c adaptive E/I mechanism remains active in:

ki_system\v8_phase7c_adaptive_boundaries_and_ei_balance_release.py

This phase provides:

adaptive boundaries,
glutamate-GABA balance,
persistent E/I state,
and sigmoid soft clipping.
Sigmoid soft clipping

The _soft_clamp() implementation remains present and active.

The configuration parameter:

sigmoid_softness

also remains present.

Runtime and state markers continue to identify:

sigmoid_soft_clipping = True

Soft clipping prevents abrupt hard-limit behavior while retaining sensitivity as values approach their boundaries.

The cooperative six-core authority consumes the Phase-7c GABA and glutamate states. It does not replace the E/I mechanism.

7. Cooperative Sleep-Wake Architecture

BrainStem now supports a cooperative sleep-wake decision instead of relying exclusively on an adenosine threshold.

Adenosine remains an important homeostatic sleep-pressure signal, but the final state can also reflect the combined condition of the wider neuromodulator network.

Cooperative sleep score

The current sleep score consists of:

35% adenosine pressure
25% release from wake and arousal drive
20% inhibitory readiness
12% consolidation readiness
8% absence of cortisol-related stress blocking
Arousal component

The arousal calculation includes:

histamine,
orexin,
noradrenaline,
acetylcholine,
and cortisol.

A decrease in these wake-supporting signals increases the possibility of sleep entry.

Inhibitory readiness

Inhibitory readiness considers:

Phase-7c GABA,
inhibition bias,
and reduced glutamate dominance.
Consolidation readiness

Consolidation readiness considers:

consolidation bias,
BDNF,
and serotonin.
Stress blocking

Elevated cortisol reduces sleep readiness.

Cortisol therefore represents more than a graphical status value. It contributes to whether the system is sufficiently stable to enter a consolidation-oriented state.

8. Sleep-Wake State Machine

The cooperative state machine is stored in:

cooperative_sleep_wake_state

Cycle-level provenance is stored in:

cooperative_sleep_wake_cycles

Default thresholds
Sleep-entry threshold: 0.62
Wake-entry threshold: 0.42
Minimum dwell time: 3 cycles

The gap between the entry and exit thresholds provides hysteresis and helps prevent rapid state oscillation.

Recorded cycle data

Each cooperative sleep-wake cycle records:

cycle index,
previous state,
current state,
transition status,
transition reason,
total sleep score,
adenosine pressure,
release from arousal,
inhibitory readiness,
consolidation readiness,
cortisol-related stress block,
core neuromodulator state before regulation,
calculated core targets,
and core state after regulation.
Transition reasons

The implemented transition reasons include:

cooperative_sleep_entry
cooperative_wake_entry
hold

The state is not forced to change merely because one component varies.

9. Adenosine Homeostat

The existing Phase-7a adenosine homeostat remains active.

Adenosine continues to:

accumulate with wake activity,
represent homeostatic sleep pressure,
respond to activity and acetylcholine,
trigger homeostatic downscaling,
interact with endocannabinoid regulation,
and recover after sleep-related downscaling.

The cooperative sleep mechanism supplements the adenosine homeostat rather than removing it.

BrainStem therefore has two valid sleep-entry sources:

the established adenosine homeostat,
the cooperative neuromodulator state.
10. Histamine and Wake Arousal

Phase 7e continues to regulate histamine.

Histamine is calculated from:

adenosine coupling,
measured wake activity,
and a smoothed previous histamine state.

The current histamine regime can include:

wake_active
wake_transition
sleep_permissive
transition

The histamine phase now consumes the cooperative sleep-wake state when that state exists.

If the cooperative state has not yet been initialized, the existing adenosine homeostat remains the fallback source.

11. Orexin and Wake Endurance

Phase 7f continues to regulate orexin.

Orexin is influenced by:

unread corpus fraction,
marginal learning progress,
and histamine.

Its regimes remain:

curious_drive
balanced
satiated

Orexin contributes to the cooperative arousal score and therefore influences whether the system remains awake or becomes sleep-ready.

12. BDNF and Consolidation

Phase 7g continues to regulate BDNF.

BDNF is based on:

consolidation consistency,
marginal progress,
and current activity.

Its regimes include:

growth
maintenance
low_plasticity

BDNF contributes to cooperative consolidation readiness.

The guarded computational kernel path for BDNF remains present.

13. Cortisol and Stability Regulation

The Phase-7cort stability watcher remains active.

It evaluates:

threshold drift,
survivor behavior,
effectiveness,
oscillation,
saturation,
and combined allostatic load.

Cortisol is smoothed from the resulting allostatic load.

The stability watcher can classify conditions such as:

chronic effectiveness pressure,
over-selection,
under-selection,
threshold drift,
oscillation,
and E/I saturation.

Stage-2 nudges remain bounded by:

Stage-2 activation,
warm-up requirements,
allostatic-load gates,
cooldown,
per-value nudge limits,
a total cycle budget,
savepoint protection,
and postcondition validation.

The cooperative sleep authority consumes the cortisol state as a stress-blocking factor.

14. Offline Replay and Meta-Plasticity

Phase 6a continues to perform offline replay after wake cycles.

Replay candidates can be derived from:

context hypotheses,
internal learning gaps,
and Phase-5g experiment outcomes.

Replay behavior considers:

outcome score,
closure delta,
overlap,
no-candidate rate,
replay priority,
persistent pressure,
and plasticity.

The replay system maintains:

candidate history,
replay events,
replay memory,
cycle summaries,
meta-plasticity state,
and neuromodulator profiles.

The new six-core authority uses the Phase-6a meta-plasticity signals while providing the final canonical six-core state.

15. Slow-Wave Sleep

Phase 7d continues to implement slow-wave sleep and self-regulating down-selection.

Slow-wave sleep can now start when either:

the existing Phase-7a homeostat is in sleep mode,
or the cooperative sleep-wake state is sleep.

The cycle result identifies the active entry authority:

adenosine_homeostat
cooperative
Slow-wave processing

The slow-wave phase continues to use:

multiple oscillations,
candidate reactivation,
anchor interleaving,
adaptive thresholds,
participation requirements,
consistency-based survival,
reinforcement,
weakening,
GABA-dependent selection pressure,
and glutamate-dependent activity.
16. Efraimidis-Spirakis Sampling

The Efraimidis-Spirakis weighted sampling algorithm remains active in Phase 7d.

It is used during slow-wave oscillations to perform weighted sampling without replacement.

The implementation generates randomized weighted keys from candidate activity values:

random_value ** (1.0 / activity_weight)

Candidates are sorted by these keys, and the strongest weighted selections are used for the current oscillation.

The cooperative sleep work did not replace or modify this selection mechanism.

17. Endocannabinoid Regulation

The Phase-7b endocannabinoid mechanism remains active.

It includes:

2-AG decay,
anandamide regulation,
LTD-like pull toward balanced states,
retrograde learning-rate dampening,
and adenosine-coordinated override behavior.

Endocannabinoid actions remain focused on modulation and stabilization of learning dynamics.

They do not open direct fact, relation, or question writes.

18. GUI State

The GUI continues to display all twelve neuromodulators.

Core values

The first six values are read from:

phase6a_neuromodulated_sleep_state

These values are now updated by the cooperative six-core authority after the existing downstream neuromodulator chain has completed.

Sleep display

The GUI first checks:

cooperative_sleep_wake_state.state

If no cooperative state exists yet, the GUI falls back to the previous adenosine/histamine heuristic.

The GUI also receives:

sleep authority,
sleep score,
current sleep-wake state,
neuromodulator values,
neuromodulator regimes,
and current homeostatic state.
Autonomous GUI-cycle contract

One visible GUI cycle contains five real backend cycles.

The GUI provides:

one outer autonomous-cycle heading,
five internal evaluations,
five diagnostic snapshots,
and incremental progress states from 0 to 100 percent.

Progress corresponds to actual completed backend work rather than a visual-only animation.

GUI logs remain bounded to prevent unlimited growth.

The GUI queue and pump keep Tkinter widget updates on the main thread.

19. Stage-B Preparation

Stage-B functionality remains guarded.

The current architecture includes:

guarded hypothesis graduation,
consolidation requirements,
warm-up protection,
critic-gate preparation,
bounded promotion budgeting,
and safety checks.

The intended graduation threshold remains:

at least three survived 7d consolidations before a hypothesis can become eligible.

The initial graduation budget remains:

one promotion per cycle.

This does not enable fact promotion.

A stable hypothesis and a promoted fact remain separate concepts.

20. Productive Write Safety

The following productive paths remain closed:

direct facts writes,
direct relations writes,
direct questions writes,
unrestricted internal-learning-gap production,
Attention production,
Phase-5f productive experiments,
Phase-5g productive experiments,
Phase-5i productive experiments,
direct fact promotion.

The new cooperative module writes only:

the six canonical neuromodulator values,
cooperative sleep-wake state,
and bounded sleep-wake cycle provenance.

It does not write facts, relations, questions, attention items, learning gaps, experiment outcomes, or promoted knowledge.

21. Schema Discipline

The new cooperative module defines all of its columns in SCHEMA_TABLES.

It provides:

idempotent ensure_schema,
_self_check_schema,
explicit state-table creation,
explicit cycle-table creation,
an index on cycle identity,
and validation before state calculation.

The key-value read contract uses:

return dict(con.execute("SELECT key,value FROM " + table).fetchall())

The new tables are compatible with an existing BrainStem database. Missing cooperative tables are created when the new phase first executes.

22. Runtime Registration

The cooperative authority is registered in:

ki_system\phase_registry.py

It is positioned after the existing cortisol phase and before guarded Stage-B graduation.

The relevant effective order is:

Context and hypothesis-learning phases
Phase 6a replay and meta-plasticity
Phase 6b replay effectiveness
Phase 6c bias persistence and self-regulation
Phase 6d saturation homeostasis
Phase 7a adenosine homeostasis
Phase 7b endocannabinoid regulation
Phase 7b1 wake-chain bridge
Runtime acceleration layers
Phase 7c E/I balance and sigmoid soft clipping
Phase 7d slow-wave sleep
Phase 7e histamine
Phase 7f orexin
Phase 7g BDNF
Phase 7cort stability and cortisol
Cooperative six-core and sleep-wake authority
Guarded Stage-B graduation
Shadow recheck runtime
Stage-B gapflow runtime contract

The guarded Stage-B wrapper explicitly invokes the cooperative authority so that later wrappers do not bypass the new phase.

23. Validation Status

The updated source package contains 66 Python files.

Completed checks
Base64 project extraction: passed
Extracted project sections: 65
Base64 decoding errors: 0
Updated Python modules: 66
Full Python compilation: passed
Python compilation errors: 0
Cooperative schema creation: passed
Cooperative schema self-check: passed
SQLite state-write test: passed
Six-core before/after delta test: passed
Sleep-score calculation: passed
Hysteresis-state persistence: passed
Runtime registry check: passed
Stage-B wrapper-chain check: passed
Phase-7d cooperative entry check: passed
GUI cooperative-state check: passed
Efraimidis-Spirakis presence check: passed
Sigmoid soft-clipping presence check: passed
Functional test result

Using representative existing BrainStem states, the isolated SQLite test produced measurable changes in all six core neuromodulators:

Dopamine: +0.051120
Serotonin: +0.049554
Glutamate: +0.000718
GABA: +0.033592
Noradrenaline: -0.032850
Acetylcholine: -0.026370

The calculated sleep score was:

0.5262

This remained below the default sleep-entry threshold of 0.62, so the test correctly retained the wake state.

The test confirms that the regulator can change all six values without forcing a sleep transition.

24. Stability and Drift Status

The historical 1,344-cycle drift validation applied to an earlier project state.

Because the current project contains later architectural changes, including:

runtime integration work,
updated GUI behavior,
cooperative six-core regulation,
and cooperative sleep-wake authority,

the earlier drift result must not be treated as a validation of the current build.

A new full stability and drift validation remains required before the current architecture can be declared fully Stage-B ready.

Such a validation should be performed on a frozen release candidate rather than after every small change.

25. Known Development Boundaries

The current source package has been validated through compilation and an isolated SQLite functional test.

The supplied project export did not include the productive ki_memory.sqlite3 database. Therefore, the following require validation in the live project environment:

actual six-core deltas under the present production state,
real sleep-score development over long runs,
real wake-to-sleep and sleep-to-wake transitions,
interaction with the current database history,
long-duration GUI synchronization,
long-duration state stability,
and full drift behavior.

These are validation requirements, not missing source components.

26. Legacy and Compatibility Status
Replaced or superseded behavior
Adenosine as the only effective sleep-entry authority
GUI sleep detection based only on an adenosine/histamine heuristic
absence of a common final writer for all six core neuromodulators
exclusive dependence of the visible core state on Phase-6a replay outputs
Slow-wave admission based only on phase7a homeostat mode
Retained behavior
Adenosine homeostasis
Phase-7c E/I balance
Sigmoid soft clipping
Phase-7d slow-wave processing
Efraimidis-Spirakis weighted sampling
Histamine regulation
Orexin regulation
BDNF regulation
Cortisol stability monitoring
Endocannabinoid retrograde regulation
Phase-6a replay
Phase-6b effectiveness evaluation
Stage-B safety gates
three-consolidation eligibility threshold
warm-up dampening
one-promotion-per-cycle budget
closed fact-promotion path
no word blacklists
no direct fact, relation, or question writes
27. Current Readiness Assessment
Implemented
hypothesis-centered learning architecture,
modern phase registry,
twelve digital neuromodulators,
canonical six-core neuromodulator dynamics,
cooperative sleep-wake score,
sleep-wake hysteresis,
adenosine fallback authority,
histamine, orexin, BDNF, cortisol, and endocannabinoid regulation,
E/I balancing,
sigmoid soft clipping,
slow-wave replay,
Efraimidis-Spirakis sampling,
GUI integration,
Stage-B guarded runtime structure,
schema-safe state persistence,
and productive-write restrictions.
Validated at source and isolated-runtime level
complete compilation,
schema materialization,
six-core state changes,
cooperative score calculation,
sleep-wake state persistence,
runtime registration,
wrapper-chain continuity,
and safety metadata.
Still required before final Stage-B readiness
validation against the live database,
long-duration runtime observation,
full current-build stability validation,
full current-build drift validation,
verification of repeated natural cooperative sleep transitions,
and confirmation that the six neuromodulators remain responsive without unstable oscillation or artificial drift.
28. Current Project Summary

BrainStem is currently a self-learning, hypothesis-centered language and text understanding system with a phase-based autonomous runtime.

The project now has:

a unified dynamic authority for the six core neuromodulators,
a cooperative and biologically inspired sleep-wake decision,
preservation of the adenosine homeostat,
preserved glutamate-GABA E/I control,
preserved sigmoid soft clipping,
preserved Efraimidis-Spirakis slow-wave selection,
integrated histamine, orexin, BDNF, cortisol, and endocannabinoid regulation,
a GUI connected to the canonical neuromodulator and sleep state,
and guarded preparation for Stage-B hypothesis graduation.

The current build is technically integrated and passes source-level and isolated SQLite validation. It should now be treated as the candidate basis for live database testing and a new full stability and drift validation.

Overall status: Integrated current-build candidate, safety gates preserved, live-system and long-duration validation pending.